Naive aggregation strategy (#1440)
ethereum/eth2.0-specs: specs/networking/p2p-interface.md

- `gossip_history` (number of heartbeat intervals to retain message IDs): 5
- `heartbeat_interval` (frequency of heartbeat, seconds): 1

### Topics and messages

Topics are plain UTF-8 strings and are encoded on the wire as determined by protobuf (gossipsub messages are enveloped in protobuf messages). Topic strings have form: `/eth2/TopicName/TopicEncoding`. This defines both the type of data being sent on the topic and how the data field of the message is encoded.

Each gossipsub [message](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p-pubsub/blob/master/pb/rpc.proto#L17-L24) has a maximum size of `GOSSIP_MAX_SIZE`. Clients MUST reject (fail validation) messages that are over this size limit. Likewise, clients MUST NOT emit or propagate messages larger than this limit.

The payload is carried in the `data` field of a gossipsub message, and varies depending on the topic:

| Topic                                  | Message Type      |
|----------------------------------------|-------------------|
| beacon_block                           | BeaconBlock       |
| beacon_aggregate_and_proof             | AggregateAndProof |
| beacon_attestation\*                   | Attestation       |

> | committee_index{N}\_beacon_attestation | Attestation       |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| committee_index{subnet_id}\_beacon_attestation | Attestation       |
```

\* The `beacon_attestation` topic is only for interop and will be removed prior to mainnet.

#### Global topics

There are two primary global topics used to propagate beacon blocks and aggregate attestations to all nodes on the network. Their `TopicName`s are:

- `beacon_block` - This topic is used solely for propagating new beacon blocks to all nodes on the networks. Blocks are sent in their entirety. Clients MUST validate the block proposer signature before forwarding it across the network.
- `beacon_aggregate_and_proof` - This topic is used to propagate aggregated attestations (as `AggregateAndProof`s) to subscribing nodes (typically validators) to be included in future blocks. The following validations MUST pass before forwarding the `aggregate_and_proof` on the network.
    - The aggregate attestation defined by `hash_tree_root(aggregate_and_proof.aggregate)` has _not_ already been seen (via aggregate gossip, within a block, or through the creation of an equivalent aggregate locally).
    - The block being voted for (`aggregate_and_proof.aggregate.data.beacon_block_root`) passes validation.

>     - `aggregate_and_proof.aggregate.data.slot` is within the last `ATTESTATION_PROPAGATION_SLOT_RANGE` slots.

Reviewer: nitpick: maybe define "within the last `ATTESTATION_PROPAGATION_SLOT_RANGE` slots" more precisely? Does that mean `aggregate_and_proof.aggregate.data.slot >= state.slot - ATTESTATION_PROPAGATION_SLOT_RANGE`?

- `voluntary_exit` - This topic is used solely for propagating voluntary validator exits to proposers on the network. Voluntary exits are sent in their entirety. Clients who receive a voluntary exit on this topic MUST validate the conditions within `process_voluntary_exit` before forwarding it across the network.
- `proposer_slashing` - This topic is used solely for propagating proposer slashings to proposers on the network. Proposer slashings are sent in their entirety. Clients who receive a proposer slashing on this topic MUST validate the conditions within `process_proposer_slashing` before forwarding it across the network.
- `attester_slashing` - This topic is used solely for propagating attester slashings to proposers on the network. Attester slashings are sent in their entirety. Clients who receive an attester slashing on this topic MUST validate the conditions within `process_attester_slashing` before forwarding it across the network.

#### Attestation subnets

Attestation subnets are used to propagate unaggregated attestations to subsections of the network. Their `TopicName`s are:

> - `committee_index{index % ATTESTATION_SUBNET_COUNT}_beacon_attestation` - These topics are used to propagate unaggregated attestations to subsections of the network (typically beacon and persistent committees) to be aggregated before being gossiped to `beacon_aggregate_and_proof`. The following validations MUST pass before forwarding the `attestation` on the network.

Reviewer: The `index` is explained in the following "Mainnet" section. Maybe use `committee_index{subnet_id}_beacon_attestation` here?
```suggestion
- `committee_index{subnet_id}_beacon_attestation` - These topics are used to propagate unaggregated attestations to the subnet `subnet_id` (typically beacon and persistent committees) to be aggregated before being gossiped to `beacon_aggregate_and_proof`. The following validations MUST pass before forwarding the `attestation` on the subnet.
```

    - The attestation's committee index (`attestation.data.index`) is for the correct subnet.
    - The attestation is unaggregated -- that is, it has exactly one participating validator (`len([bit for bit in attestation.aggregation_bits if bit == 0b1]) == 1`).
    - The block being voted for (`attestation.data.beacon_block_root`) passes validation.

>     - `attestation.data.slot` is within the last `ATTESTATION_PROPAGATION_SLOT_RANGE` slots.

Reviewer: Ditto. Does that mean `attestation.data.slot >= state.slot - ATTESTATION_PROPAGATION_SLOT_RANGE`?

    - The signature of `attestation` is valid.

#### Interop

Unaggregated and aggregated attestations from all shards are sent as `Attestation`s to the `beacon_attestation` topic. Clients are not required to publish aggregate attestations but must be able to process them. All validating clients SHOULD try to perform local attestation aggregation to prepare for block proposing.

#### Mainnet

> Attestation broadcasting is grouped into subnets defined by a topic. The number of subnets is defined via `ATTESTATION_SUBNET_COUNT`. The `CommitteeIndex`, `index`, is assigned to the topic: `committee_index{index % ATTESTATION_SUBNET_COUNT}_beacon_attestation`.

Reviewer: If modifying to `committee_index{subnet_id}\_beacon_attestation` as above, suggesting:
```suggestion
Attestation broadcasting is grouped into subnets defined by a topic. The number of subnets is defined via `ATTESTATION_SUBNET_COUNT`. For the `committee_index{subnet_id}_beacon_attestation` topics, `subnet_id` is set to `index % ATTESTATION_SUBNET_COUNT`, where `index` is the `CommitteeIndex` of the given committee.
```

Topic strings have form: `/eth2/TopicName/TopicEncoding`. This defines both the type of data being sent on the topic and how the data field of the message is encoded. (Further details can be found in [Messages](#Messages)).

> There are two main topics used to propagate aggregate attestations and beacon blocks to all nodes on the network. Their `TopicName`s are:

Reviewer: To clarify, this section is for global, right?
```suggestion
There are two main topics used to propagate aggregate attestations and beacon blocks to all nodes on the global network. Their `TopicName`s are:
```

There are two main topics used to propagate aggregate attestations and beacon blocks to all nodes on the network. Their `TopicName`s are:

- `beacon_block` - This topic is used solely for propagating new beacon blocks to all nodes on the networks. Blocks are sent in their entirety. Clients MUST validate the block proposer signature before forwarding it across the network.
- `beacon_aggregate_and_proof` - This topic is used to propagate aggregated attestations (as `AggregateAndProof`s) to subscribing nodes (typically validators) to be included in future blocks. The following validations MUST pass before forwarding the `aggregate_and_proof` on the network.
    - Clients MUST validate that the block being voted for (`aggregate_and_proof.aggregate.data.beacon_block_root`) passes validation.
    - Clients MUST validate that `aggregate_and_proof.aggregate.data.slot` is
      within the last `ATTESTATION_PROPAGATION_SLOT_RANGE` slots.
    - Clients MUST validate that the validator index is within the aggregate's

>       committee -- i.e. `aggregate_and_proof.index in get_attesting_indices(state, aggregate_and_proof.aggregate.data, aggregate_and_proof.aggregate.aggregation_bits)`.

Author: This means that being selected as an aggregator only gives you the right to send your aggregate. If this weren't the case, then I could take your proof and send whatever aggregates I wanted.

That is, unless we added a third signature that signed over the aggregate+proof itself. Which is... overkill (?)

    - Clients MUST validate that `aggregate_and_proof.selection_proof` selects
      the validator as an aggregator for the slot -- i.e. `is_aggregator(state, aggregate_and_proof.aggregate.data.index, aggregate_and_proof.selection_proof)` returns `True`.
    - Clients MUST validate that the `aggregate_and_proof.selection_proof` is a
      valid signature of the `aggregate_and_proof.aggregate.data.slot` by the validator with index `aggregate_and_proof.index`.

>     - Clients MUST validate that the signature of `aggregate_and_proof.aggregate`.

Reviewer 2: Note that this ensures bitlist correctness implicitly. And above checks can error unexpectedly because of attestation bitlist length issues. Maybe add a note that the attestation contents must be validated with the signature first?

Author: hmmm, but I generally want to do the cheap checks first before doing the expensive signature check.

Even if an attacker crafts an attestation with bitlength issues that show up prior to signature validation, what can they actually achieve?

Reviewer 2: Nothing much, trying to find ways to bypass/mess with these conditions. And checking properties based on assumptions/side-effects of other checks is part of that.
But worst-case here would be an unexpected panic because of some indexing error during one of the above checks.

Attestation subnets are used to propagate unaggregated attestations to subsections of the network. Their `TopicName`s are:

> - `index{index % ATTESTATION_SUBNET_COUNT}_beacon_attestation` - These topics are used to propagate unaggregated attestations to subsections of the network (typically beacon and persistent committees) to be aggregated before being gossiped to `beacon_aggregate_and_proof`. The following validations MUST pass before forwarding the `attestation` on the network.

Author: it's supposed to read as something like `index10_beacon_attestation`. This will ultimately be replaced with shard specific attestation subnets, but the concept of shard doesn't exist in phase 0 and will be an overlay on top of `CommitteeIndex` which is defined in phase 0.

Maybe `committee_index{committee_index % ATTESTATION_SUBNET_COUNT}_beacon_attestation` would be clearer

> - `index{index % ATTESTATION_SUBNET_COUNT}_beacon_attestation` - These topics are used to propagate unaggregated attestations to subsections of the network (typically beacon and persistent committees) to be aggregated before being gossiped to `beacon_aggregate_and_proof`. The following validations MUST pass before forwarding the `attestation` on the network.

Author: renamed to `committee_indexN_beacon_attestation`

#### Interop

> Unaggregated and aggregated attestations from all shards are sent as `Attestation`s to the `beacon_aggregate_and_proof` topic. Clients are not required to publish aggregate attestations but must be able to process them. All validating clients SHOULD try to perform local attestation aggregation to prepare for block proposing.

Author: I'm a bit torn here. Think we should leave the interop spec as it was. I can add back in the `beacon_attestation` channel for global propagation of individual attestations and we can just deprecate it for mainnet configurations

> Unaggregated and aggregated attestations from all shards are sent as `Attestation`s to the `beacon_aggregate_and_proof` topic. Clients are not required to publish aggregate attestations but must be able to process them. All validating clients SHOULD try to perform local attestation aggregation to prepare for block proposing.

Reviewer 2: I think I like the `ATTESTATION_SUBNET_COUNT == 1` since it is close to mainnet, but super simple as there is only one subnet (so not really a subnet, can be implemented easily by everone). Let's ask on the call maybe?

> Unaggregated and aggregated attestations from all shards are sent as `Attestation`s to the `beacon_aggregate_and_proof` topic. Clients are not required to publish aggregate attestations but must be able to process them. All validating clients SHOULD try to perform local attestation aggregation to prepare for block proposing.

Author: thoughts on that?

> Unaggregated and aggregated attestations from all shards are sent as `Attestation`s to the `beacon_aggregate_and_proof` topic. Clients are not required to publish aggregate attestations but must be able to process them. All validating clients SHOULD try to perform local attestation aggregation to prepare for block proposing.

Reviewer 3: I suspect we should do an `interopv2` which is basically mainnet-parameters but testnet - this way we can leave interop as is for now and let people get the basics right  (we need this for noise and the other mainnet changes anyway)

it looks like it should possible that clients that support aggregation can start publishing to the aggregation topics for testing as soon as they're ready.

> Unaggregated and aggregated attestations from all shards are sent as `Attestation`s to the `beacon_aggregate_and_proof` topic. Clients are not required to publish aggregate attestations but must be able to process them. All validating clients SHOULD try to perform local attestation aggregation to prepare for block proposing.

Author: I added back in the `beacon_attestation` topic for interop with a note that it will be removed for mainnet. Agreed that this simple procedure should stick around a little longer

The payload is carried in the `data` field of a gossipsub message, and varies depending on the topic:

| Topic                                  | Message Type      |
|----------------------------------------|-------------------|
| beacon_block                           | BeaconBlock       |
| beacon_aggregate_and_proof             | AggregateAndProof |
| beacon_attestation\*                   | Attestation       |
| committee_index{N}\_beacon_attestation | Attestation       |
| voluntary_exit                         | VoluntaryExit     |
| proposer_slashing                      | ProposerSlashing  |

> | attester_slashing                      | AttesterSlashing  |

Reviewer: IMO the current "Topics" and "Messages" sections are difficult to look up.
It would be nice to (i) have a single table to explain the topics and (ii) move the `beacon_aggregate_and_proof` and `committee_index{N}\_beacon_attestation` validation logic explainer to its own section.

Author: did a bit of a reorg. Think it is better now
